Add page documenting how to test other targets (#1236)
ferrocene/ferrocene: ferrocene/doc/internal-procedures/src/testing-other-targets.rst

Linux using `Lima <https://lima-vm.io/>`_ (Mac/Linux) or
`WSL2 <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install>`_ (Windows). Lima can be used to test
other architectures such as :ref:`x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu`, :target:`aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu`, or
:target:`riscv64gc-unknown-linux-gnu`, while WSL2 can do similar with `QEMU <https://www.qemu.org/>`_.

Additionally, Ferrocene supports testing a number of targets which are not supported by upstream.
When testing locally, special tools or configuration may be required.

In general, any "bare-metal" target listed in :doc:`user-manual:targets/index` requires special
setup inside a Linux based environment.

Host Setup
----------

Unless otherwise noted, all bare-metal targets are tested in QEMU on a Linux host.
On macOS, a tool like Lima or Docker must be used. On Windows, WSL2 must be used.

Please refer to the relevant per-host setup instructions below.

:ref:`x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You need to have all the normal prerequisites for testing Rust installed, as well as a few extras:

.. code-block:: bash

>    sudo apt install awscli ninja-build bzip2 cmake gcc g++ qemu-user-static binfmt-support

Reviewer: AWS CLI should not be installed through apt, at least on Ubuntu.

We require version 2.x of the CLI (due to our use of AWS SSO), but before Ubuntu 24.04 Ubuntu only shipped version 1.x. Then, in 24.04 they removed awscli from the archives (replacing it with a snap package), and then 2.x seems to be available in 24.10 now.

We already have it listed as a prerequisite in the onboarding instructions, so that should be enough. I'd love the whole list of packages (minus awscli) to be moved to the onboarding instructions.

Author: Some packages are testing specific (eg binfmt) so I'd keep those isolated here.

I glanced through onboarding and it seems like `setup-local-env.rst` is a more appropriate place (it already lists some dependencies). I'll update that page with per-OS dep lists.

:ref:`aarch64-apple-darwin`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> You need to use Lima. It's recommended to use the 'default' template and modify it as shown below.

Reviewer 2: > It's recommended 

is kinda vague, and unclear who is recommending and why. It's probably more clear to just say "Use the default template:"

However, default template and sample template don't sound like the same thing to me :-p

.. note::

   The guest needs to have at more than the default of 4GiB of memory to not trigger the OOM

>    killer during build. 8GiB is recommended.

Reviewer 2: Maybe move this recommendation to the first para? 

> Use Lima, with at least 8 GiB memory, and modify the following template

kinda thing?

      arch: "aarch64"
      digest: "sha256:fb39312ffd2b47b97eaef6ff197912eaa3e0a215eb3eecfbf2a24acd96ee1125"
    - location: "https://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/releases/24.10/release/ubuntu-24.10-server-cloudimg-arm64.img"
      arch: "aarch64"
    mounts:
    - location: "~"
    - location: "/tmp/lima"
      writable: true
    ssh:
      forwardAgent: true
    cpus: 8
    memory: "8GiB"
    mountTypesUnsupported: ["9p"]

If you changed your configuration, make sure to restart the environment with ``limactl stop default`` then ``limactl start default``.

Enter the shell with ``limactl shell default``.

:ref:`x86_64-pc-windows-msvc`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You need to use WSL2. It's recommended to use the latest stable Ubuntu.

Here is a sample configuration for your ``/etc/wsl.conf`` (in the guest):

.. code-block::

    [user]
    default=ana

    [boot]
    systemd=true

    [wsl2]
    nestedVirtualization=true
    
If you changed your configuration, make sure to restart the environment with ``wsl --shutdown``.

Enter the shell with ``wsl``, or `point Visual Studio Code <https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/wsl-tutorial>`_ at it.

Target Procedures
-----------------

> In general, bare-metal targets follow a similar strategy: Use `binfmt_misc` to run the

Reviewer 2: "In general" usually (sic) doesn't add much, safe to delete.

test target binaries.

:ref:`aarch64-unknown-none`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. Note::
    

>     In a ``aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu`` environment you may simply skip to the final step,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    In a ``aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu`` environment you may simply skip to the final step, running the tests, 
```

You can now run the tests:

.. code-block:: bash

    ./x test --stage 1 --target aarch64-unknown-ferrocenecoretest library/core

:target:`thumbv7em-none-eabihf` & :target:`thumbv7em-none-eabi`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Install the necessary packages:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo apt install gcc-arm-none-eabi qemu-system-arm

If you don't already have a ``/usr/share/binfmts/qemu-arm`` file, create one:

.. code-block:: bash

    package qemu-arm
    interpreter /usr/bin/qemu-arm-static
    magic \x7fELF\x01\x01\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x02\x00\x28\x00
    mask \xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\x00\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xfe\xff\xff\xff
    credentials no
    preserve no
    fix_binary no
    
Then make sure it's imported:

.. code-block:: bash
    
   sudo update-binfmts --import qemu-arm

Currently, this target uses our *secret sauce*. Eventually this will be an open source component of Ferrocene, but for now, it's our little bit of arcane magic.

First, set the target:

.. code-block:: bash

    export TARGET="thumbv7em-ferrocenecoretest-eabihf"
    # or 
    export TARGET="thumbv7em-ferrocenecoretest-eabi"

> Next, it's possible to build the *secret sauce*, or to download it. Generally, it's easier to download it, but if necessary you can find the repository in the `Ferrocene <https://github.com/ferrocene>`_ organization.

Reviewer 2: How about 

```suggestion
Download the secret sauce FROM WHERE?, or you can build it from the repository in the `Ferrocene <https://github.com/ferrocene>`_ organization if necessary.
```
should we point to which repo?

Author: I'd prefer to keep our cards close on this one. The repository has setup instructions, and it is deliberately secret for the time being. Any of our internal developers can easily find it using the search for "sauce" or "secret". We'll eventually open source it and these steps will vanish.

Reviewer: TBH we shouldn't manually download stuff and put it in a known location in `/tmp`, also because it has the risk of weird/unintuitive failures if somehow you use an old cached version. But this is not a documentation problem, rather a tooling problem. Let's followup this in Zulip.

Author: Ya -- agree, would be very happy to improve the state of this, but this document describes it as-it-exists.

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
   SPDX-FileCopyrightText: The Ferrocene Developers

Testing Other Targets 
=====================

> It's often possible to test targets other than your host tuple. Windows and macOS hosts can target
> Linux using `Lima <https://lima-vm.io/>`_ (Mac/Linux) or
> `WSL2 <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install>`_ (Windows). Lima can be used to test
> other architectures such as :ref:`x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu`, :target:`aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu`, or
> :target:`riscv64gc-unknown-linux-gnu`, while WSL2 can do similar with `QEMU <https://www.qemu.org/>`_.

Reviewer 2: How about breaking this up like

```suggestion
It's often possible to test targets other than your host tuple. Windows and macOS hosts can target
Linux using `Lima <https://lima-vm.io/>`_ (Mac/Linux) or
`WSL2 <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install>`_ (Windows). 

- Lima can be used to test
other architectures such as :ref:`x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu`, :target:`aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu`, or
:target:`riscv64gc-unknown-linux-gnu`,
- WSL2 can do similar with `QEMU <https://www.qemu.org/>`_.
```

and I'd probably go further and specificy the WSL2 targets so they don't have to read the lima bullet point?

Author: I'm just gonna yank the last bit I think. It muddles the messaging.

Author: > Windows and macOS hosts can test Linux hosts using `Lima <https://lima-vm.io/>`_ (macOS/Linux) or
> `WSL2 <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install>`_ (Windows). While Lima supports other
> instruction set architectures, WSL2 users must rely on QEMU.

.. code-block:: yaml

    cat <<- EOF | limactl create --name=ferrocene
        minimumLimaVersion: "1.0.0"
        images:
        - location: "https://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/releases/24.10/release-20241212/ubuntu-24.10-server-cloudimg-arm64.img"
          arch: "aarch64"
          digest: "sha256:fb39312ffd2b47b97eaef6ff197912eaa3e0a215eb3eecfbf2a24acd96ee1125"
        - location: "https://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/releases/24.10/release/ubuntu-24.10-server-cloudimg-arm64.img"
          arch: "aarch64"
        mounts:
        - location: "~"
        - location: "/tmp/lima"
        writable: true
        ssh:
        forwardAgent: true
        cpus: 8
        memory: "8GiB"
        mountTypesUnsupported: ["9p"]
    EOF

Start the guest:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    limactl start ferrocene

Shell into the guest:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    limactl shell ferrocene

You can also point `Visual Studio Code <https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/ssh>`_ at it
using `these steps <https://github.com/lima-vm/lima/discussions/1890#discussioncomment-7221563>`.

:ref:`x86_64-pc-windows-msvc`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Setup WSL2, if you don't have it:

.. code-block:: bash

>     wsl --install --distribution Ubuntu-24.10

Reviewer 3: @Hoverbear -

Ubuntu-24.10 is not available on my Windows machine (Win 11 Home, Intel i7)

```sh
 wsl --list --online
The following is a list of valid distributions that can be installed.
Install using 'wsl.exe --install <Distro>'.

NAME                            FRIENDLY NAME
Ubuntu                          Ubuntu
Debian                          Debian GNU/Linux
kali-linux                      Kali Linux Rolling
Ubuntu-18.04                    Ubuntu 18.04 LTS
Ubuntu-20.04                    Ubuntu 20.04 LTS
Ubuntu-22.04                    Ubuntu 22.04 LTS
Ubuntu-24.04                    Ubuntu 24.04 LTS
OracleLinux_7_9                 Oracle Linux 7.9
OracleLinux_8_7                 Oracle Linux 8.7
OracleLinux_9_1                 Oracle Linux 9.1
openSUSE-Leap-15.6              openSUSE Leap 15.6
SUSE-Linux-Enterprise-15-SP5    SUSE Linux Enterprise 15 SP5
SUSE-Linux-Enterprise-15-SP6    SUSE Linux Enterprise 15 SP6
openSUSE-Tumbleweed             openSUSE Tumbleweed
```

Should I try with 24.04?

Author: Oops, yes.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. Note::
    
    In a :target:`aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu` environment (such as a Lima guest on :ref:`aarch64-apple-darwin`)
    you may simply skip to the final step, running the tests, as no QEMU is needed.

Install the necessary packages:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo apt install gcc-aarch64-linux-gnu qemu-system-aarch64

If you don't already have a ``/usr/share/binfmts/qemu-aarch64`` file, create one:

.. code-block:: bash

    package qemu-aarch64
    interpreter /usr/bin/qemu-aarch64-static
    magic \x7fELF\x02\x01\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x02\x00\xb7\x00
    mask \xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\x00\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xfe\xff\xff\xff
    credentials no
    preserve no
    fix_binary no
    
Then make sure it's imported:

.. code-block:: bash
    
   sudo update-binfmts --import qemu-aarch64

You can now run the tests:

.. code-block:: bash

    ./x test --stage 1 --target aarch64-unknown-ferrocenecoretest library/core

:target:`thumbv7em-none-eabihf` & :target:`thumbv7em-none-eabi`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Install the necessary packages:

.. code-block:: bash

>     sudo apt install gcc-arm-none-eabi qemu-system-arm

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    sudo apt install gcc-arm-none-eabi qemu-system-arm binfmt-support
```

`update-binfmts` needs to be installed on Ubuntu 24.04 before we can run this.

Author: `cc` is covered in setup-local-env, previous feedback asked me to move it there.

If you don't already have a ``/usr/share/binfmts/qemu-arm`` file, create one:

.. code-block:: bash

    package qemu-arm
    interpreter /usr/bin/qemu-arm-static
    magic \x7fELF\x01\x01\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00\x02\x00\x28\x00
    mask \xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\x00\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xff\xfe\xff\xff\xff
    credentials no
    preserve no
    fix_binary no
    
Then make sure it's imported:

.. code-block:: bash
    
   sudo update-binfmts --import qemu-arm

.. note::
    
    Currently, this target uses our *secret sauce*. Eventually this will be an open source component of Ferrocene, but for now, it's our little bit of arcane magic.

> First, set the target:

Author: ```suggestion
Now set the target:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    export TARGET="thumbv7em-ferrocenecoretest-eabihf"
    # or 
    export TARGET="thumbv7em-ferrocenecoretest-eabi"

Next, it's possible to build the *secret sauce*, or to download it. Generally, it's easier to download it, but if necessary you can find the repository in the `Ferrocene <https://github.com/ferrocene>`_ organization.

Refer to the ``.circleci/workflows.yml`` file on the ``setup-secret-sauce`` command to see which date/hash of the sauce to download.

.. code-block:: bash

    export SAUCE_DATE=20250121
    export SAUCE_HASH=1671dac
    
    mkdir -p /tmp/ferrocene/$TARGET
    aws s3 cp s3://ferrocene-ci-mirrors/coretest-secret-sauce/$SAUCE_DATE/$SAUCE_HASH/$TARGET.tar.gz /tmp/ferrocene/
    tar xf /tmp/ferrocene/$TARGET.tar.gz --directory=/tmp/ferrocene/$TARGET

You can now run the tests:

.. code-block:: bash

    export QEMU_CPU=cortex-m4

>     ./x test --stage 1 --target $TARGET library/core

Reviewer 3: Does this command require downloading LLVM and in turn AWS login? I see a message to either add `download-ci-llvm = false` or `aws sso login`. I assumed that once I have the secret sauce package from above it should be ok.

Reviewer: In general AWS access is required for us when building Ferrocene.

    It is recommended to not share ``build/`` directories between multiple hosts, both for performance and correctness. To avoid this,
    you should ``cd ~`` in the guest and clone a new copy of the Ferrocene repository into the dedicated guest storage.

    Please ensure you always work from the guest-local repository.

:target-with-triple:`x86_64-pc-windows-msvc`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Setup WSL2, if you don't have it:

.. code-block:: bash

    wsl --install --distribution Ubuntu-24.04

Ensure ```nestedVirtualization`` is set in the guest ``/etc/wsl.conf``, here is an example
configuration:

.. code-block::

    [user]
    default=ana

    [boot]
    systemd=true

    [wsl2]
    nestedVirtualization=true
    
If you changed your configuration, make sure to restart the environment with ``wsl --shutdown``.

Shell into the guest:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    wsl
    
You can also point `Visual Studio Code WSL extension <https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/wsl-tutorial>`_ at it.

Finally, ensure the guest is configured according to :doc:`internal-procedures:setup-local-env` as well as the :target-with-triple:`x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu` on this page.

> .. Warning::

Reviewer 4: This warning comes back several times and concerns all hosts; maybe we should move it to the start.

Author: It's unfortunately so important that I want to make sure people bump into it even if they skip parts of the document. :(
